Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Dr. Daisy
Dixon. She's a lecturer in philosophy at Cardiff University,
and today we're going to talk about her book
Depraved The Story of Dangerous Art. So Dr. Dixon,
welcome back to the show. It's always a pleasure
to talk with you.
Ah, thank you, it's great to be back. Thanks
for having me.
No, I, I, I mean, it's awesome to have
you back. I really loved the book, by the
way, and so it's, I'm really excited to finally
have you on the show again to talk about
it. So, uh, but let me start with this
question. I, I, I know that we could go
down a big rabbit hole. Here because I know
that people who work in aesthetics, there's a huge
never ending discussion about what is art, what counts
as art, and all of that, but I mean,
in your book, do you use a specific definition
of it? I mean, what do you mean by
art
exactly? Yeah, so I kind of take a sneaky
approach in the book. I kind of avoid trying
to define art. And in part that's because art
itself is a tricky kind of concept to get
clear on. And I think because the function of
the book wasn't to necessarily get clear on a
definition. I kind of play with a few sort
of popular definitions that it's like a human made
object, perhaps intended to communicate some kind of meaning.
Or indeed to like have certain aesthetic properties. I
also skirt around the institutional, uh, definition of art
where it's just any object or any event or
thing, um, that has been sort of granted the
status of art by a certain authority like an
art world or certain experts. Um, BUT in the
book, I end up just sort of going for
it I know it when I see it. Uh,
APPROACH, which basically means that I kind of do
it by extension instead. So I include things like
traditional art objects like uh painting and sculpture, literature,
like, you know, novels and film, video art, but
I also go into like more contemporary pieces like
installations, performance, uh, but I also include video games
as well. Um. And that's in part that has
had a little bit of um not pushback, but
sort of surprise from some commentators in the general
public at least. And obviously philosophers of art have
been interested in video games for a long time.
There's a huge area of like philosophy looking at
video games now. And I think that's in part
because of its fictional worlds, most of the time.
Um, AND the fact the viewer can kind of
co-create those fictional worlds is an important thing. So
yeah, quite a wide. Conception
so you've been getting pushback from the general public
when it comes to labeling video games as art,
is that it?
Yeah, I mean, not much pushback, just some surprise,
I guess, and I think this has been an
interesting thing, writing a book for the general public,
um, taking kind of philosophical assumptions of what's done
in academia. And philosophers of art have been looking
at video games for a long time as a
kind of art form. And I do see them
as an art form, but I think there are
still some people, uh, in the general public that
would that would kind of put our video games
into a different kind of category. Um, BUT I
think they are an art form, even if they're
particularly. Peculiar, especially in the fact that the viewer,
the player is co-creating that fictional world at the
same time.
Well, I mean, I guess that it could be
argued that whenever people are interpreting a work of
art, in at least to some extent they are
sort of co-creating.
Yeah, yeah. And that is a balance I play
with, uh, in the book, the trying to marry
that tension between the artists kind of act. I
see I see artworks is kind of peculiar forms
of art and communication, uh, often using, um, Aesthetics
or a material in a way to communicate something
sometimes across, um, dimensions, sometimes depending on what your
religious beliefs are, also across, um, societies and across
time as well. Um, SO even if we don't
see them as like ordinary language, I see them
as acts of communication. And so in that you
Encounter similar issues with communication as to who is
creating the meaning, and I try and go for
a kind of, the artist is really important and
their social identity, their placement in history is really
important to, Getting out what an artwork means, but
the viewer absolutely has agency. In reaching that meaning
and as I go on later in the book
to look at actually destroying that meaning as well.
Mhm, YEAH, we will certainly get back into that
topic later in our conversation. I mean, because you're
talking about ethics in your book, the ethics surrounding
art, do you approach it through any specific ethical
theory, ethical system, or not?
Yeah, so kind of like the art definition question,
I don't settle on a particular moral theory. So
I do glance at um a few normative. MORAL
theories like consequentialism, like the ontological theories. I also
dance over kind of meta ethical questions of is
there such a thing as a moral fact? And
if so, is it determined by, um, something natural
that could be determined by sort of scientific investigation,
empirical investigation, or is it a non-natural thing like,
um, Exists in some kind of abstract realm that
we detect via intuition, um, and reason. So, What
I do do though is adopt a kind of
objectivism. So I I kind of reject moral relativism.
I also reject a nihilistic approach. I do think
there is such a thing as right and wrong,
good and bad. Um, I As I say, I
don't settle on exactly what makes something good and
bad. It could, for instance, be. You know, bad
consequences that result in just pain, um, or it
could be a violation of a moral law that
we've reached either from some divine being or just
via reason, um. But I do go for an
objectivism, so I kind of say that. There are
objective things that are wrong, because the book is
looking at immorality in particular. There are certain things
that are wrong and bad, and I say these
aren't going to be up for discussion. So I
give examples of that, um, like, Um, sexual violence,
um, enslavement of people, and then kind of more
abstract, uh, not abstract, but more structural systems, um,
like racism, sexism, transphobia, ableism, ageism. And general social
inequalities like the unfair distribution of wealth and things.
I think these things are objectively bad, and they
are bad, this is the other thing that's been
slightly controversial for the public is, you know, Someone
judging artworks based on a seeming moral system of
today. But that's I've always found that very problematic,
kind of relativistic position. Like I'm sure the millions
of people who've been slaved in, you know, for
instance, in the transatlantic slave trade, the millions of
black women, men and children, I'm sure. They wouldn't
have judged that that at the time that that
was OK. So we need to be careful who
the kind of moral judges are when we talk
about moral relativism.
Mhm. Talking about that actually, when it comes to
how we should be careful about who the moral
judges are when it comes to moral relativism, or
different kinds of moral perspectives that people might hold,
uh, I wanted to ask you about the term
you use in your, in your book, depravity, because
I, I mean, at least in Portuguese culture where
I live, but that with Imagine that also in
the UK and other places we tend to hear
terms like depraved or degenerate more from people who
are on the right wing of the political spectrum,
conservative people, religious people. Do you think that using
such a term, with using such a term, there
could be a risk that we would be serving?
The interests of those kinds of people and for
example, I'm just going to use an example. People
could use the term depraved to refer to creations
by gay artists, for example, someone might use that
term to condemn the works of Freddie Mercury, let's
say. So what, what do you think about that?
I think that's a great point. And I think
that is something that came out when I was
writing the book, um, but also, um, beginning to,
uh, learn. And so one author said to me
that when you start touring a book, you actually
learn what it's about, um, after you've written it.
I do think that's kind of true. So I
think that's a really good point about the connotations
of the word depravity absolutely seem to be. And
I think that is also sort of the case
in the UK. It's a word often reached by
and used by kind of right wing commentators, often
in tandem with obscene, as you say, degenerate, smutty,
um, and it's often used to, uh, denounce. Art
by marginalized artists or indeed art that presents sex
in a way that doesn't fit with kind of
dominant whatever the particular religion, let's just say Christian,
a kind of dominant Christian doctrine of what sex
should or can look like. Um, SO I do,
so I think when I was using the word
depravity and in the book I say that I'm
thinking about it in terms of something that's extremely
immoral. Um, SO, you know, a white lie, telling
you a white lie to make you feel good
might be technically wrong, but we wouldn't really say
it's depraved or like extremely immoral. Or maybe Emmanuel
Kant would, but, you know, it's bad, it's bad
insofar as it's a lie. It's it's not like
the worst thing we could do. And then of
course there's a spectrum and then we go all
the way from. Um, ABUSE of another human being
to genocide, right? And so when I use it,
I mean extremely immoral. But what was interesting in
writing the book is that I did notice that
it was being used, um, by some right wing
commentators to describe art that is conventionally, uh, deviant
or deviates from kind of what we deem to
be conventionally acceptable, depending on what society we live
in. Um. And so in a way, the book
has become a kind of attempt to reclaim that
word, um, whilst there's this kind of philosophical, like
this is what I mean when I use the
word, it's also kind of become this thing of,
Like one newspaper reported, did an interview with me
and it said, Daisy Dixon's standing up for depravity.
And I was like, OK, but in a way
that's true. Because if, if when if what they,
if what some people think is depraved, and it's
just like queer art. Then yeah, like, so maybe
it's an attempt to reclaim what that what depravity
actually means as well.
Yeah, yeah, that's a very interesting approach. I've had
conversations with feminist scholars on the show where they
told me that, I mean, it's been something that
feminists have also done in recent decades is to
reclaim the B word, for example, right? I mean,
I mean turning it into something that is not
really. Uh, PEJORATIVE, but something that feminists themselves and
women more generally can use, so I mean there's
that kind of approach as well.
Yeah, definitely. And I think, um, obviously the reclamation
of slurs is a tricky thing because, um, different
groups who are the target of that slur, different
people in that group are going to disagree that
for instance, uh, many black people do not want
to reclaim the N word, even though some do.
Um. You know, some specifically sexist slurs. I don't
like any of them. So I don't like want
to reclaim any of them. Um, BUT I think
with depraved, there is something potentially quite powerful that
we can do with that. So if you put
an asterisk against it, maybe, like, yes, we should
all be depraved and that, you know, this is
an important thing to be to be transgressive is
important. But doing that with an objective moral system
in place, like to call queer art depraved. Is
wrong insofar as you're saying it's extremely immoral, it's
not, but if we want to use depraved with
like an asterisk or something, then, yeah, let's all
be depraved in that way. Yeah.
So we're going to go through the several different
ways you explore in the book as to how
works of art can be moral, but do you
think that artworks themselves can be depraved, to use
your terminology, independently of whether the artist, him or
herself, is depraved or independently of their intentions?
Yeah, so Whether or not an artwork itself is
depraved is a tricky question because it can relate
to immorality in ways that might not necessarily mean
that it itself is depraved. So for instance, an
artwork might cause or inspire someone to do something
terrible, but it not necessarily be immoral in itself.
It doesn't have those like moral properties as part
of the actual work of art. Um, BUT there
are cases when, An artwork itself is depraved insofar
as um its relation to morality pertains to its
actual properties as in regards to its meaning and
what it's about and what it's doing. Um, SO
that's in terms of its moral perspective. So it's
not simply that it's depicting something immoral, um, it's
when the artwork is inviting the viewer to adopt
a problematic attitude, or we might say immoral attitude
to what's being depicted. So, you know, for instance,
an artwork that glamorizes sexual violence or champions, um,
you know, enslavement. Um, Or celebrates a totalitarian regime,
like a lot of Nazi propaganda, for instance, would
do. Um, SO in that sense it's moral perspective
is is part of its very identity as an
artwork. So in that sense it can be depraved.
However, As you rightly say, how that relates to
the artist's intention is a tricky one. Most of
the time. Or a lot of the time I'd
say that the the reason the artwork has that
perspective is in part because of the artist's intention.
Um, Leni Riefenstahl's Triumph of the Will, which philosophers
of art always use as an example, um, Thematically
when just watching it without any kind of not
like background knowledge, you can kind of see that
it's it's a celebration or very positive looking film,
um, about the Nazi regime and it's celebrating that.
The fact that Leni Riefenstahl actually, um, believed in
that is a way to kind of confirm it's
immoral perspective because it's inviting us to do as
viewers to do something wrong, um. But it's very,
sometimes it can be the case that. An artist
has a good intention. But the artwork's perspective kind
of runs away from them. So this again, this
is the problem of, yes, the artist is important,
but they don't have complete authority over what their
work not only can can do, but like indeed
what it means as well, so. There are a
few examples of this, um. One example would be
Brett Bailey's exhibit B piece, um, from I think
2013. Um, Brett Bailey is a white South African
man and in these, um, performances they were kind
of like, uh, installations with performing actors, like living,
um, kind of tableaus and. He was trying to
expose the history of the human zoo and of
um. The exploitative relations between Europe and Africa, particularly
in the 19th century with the human zoos that
were particularly prevalent in France and the UK. Um,
AND he, he had good intention for it. Like
that that's a morally laudable like thing to do.
But because of the content of the work, because
it involved actual black people, actors who had consented.
But it involved them being chained up and put
on display in this sort of recreation of the
human zoo, and many people, not all, but many
people said that the show was racist as a
result, even though the art, you know, Brett Bailey
intended the complete opposite, and there are other examples
of this happening, so. Sometimes, uh, an art artworks
more perspective might be distorted or indeed it it
fails. Perhaps because of the way it's been curated.
Maybe Brett Bailey's piece was wasn't adequately curated because
people said it was re-performing the very power relations
it was meant to critique. And that in part
is because maybe Brett Bailey's identity is a white
South African man. Mhm. Kind of put him in
an impossible relation with his own work where um
that power asymmetry that is historically significant. Was kind
of unavoidable. So yeah, sometimes an artwork can have
a more perspective that. Moves away from what the
artist intended, which is unfortunate when that happens, because
the show was closed down, it was canceled.
Yeah, I mean, you know, probably we're going to
talk more about this later, but nowadays I'm very,
I mean, I'm much more suspicious about more artists
because of unfortunately over the years people uncovering the
bad deeds of men, more and more artists out
there. So for example, I used to be a
very big fan of Neil Gaiman and Now I
completely despise the man, and for example, now I
know that in The Sandman, in one of the
chapters, it depicts an episode where there's a man
who basically is holding a woman hostage in in
his apartment and he's exploiting her sexually to, I
mean, get inspiration for his art and then Morpheus,
I mean, basically. The Sandman saves the woman, and
I mean now we know that Neil Gaiman was
doing more or less the same with with a
woman actually. So I mean sometimes I get more
and more suspicious about if a particular author, particularly
if he or she is very fixed on a
particular depiction of a particular act. I mean nowadays
I'm like, I mean, is it really just Art
or is it that the person herself has those
kinds of depraved thoughts and depraved desires, you know.
Yeah,
exactly, and I think a lot of people are
really struggling with everything that it seems continues to
come out about Neil Gaiman and how that's affecting
their engagement with his work, with his art, and
I think in that case, the, It's almost as
if depending on what the artist's intention was, er
and what their motivation was in making that work,
that can affect the very properties of that artwork,
which would mean that even people who aren't aware,
cos often these things as you say, come out
over time. I think it's not the case sometimes
that the artwork changes in meaning. Unfortunately, sometimes, again,
if that intention and motivation is there, if Gaiman
was deliberately sort of imagining that scene and giving
it to the reader in a way that he
was getting some kind of gratification from it or
arousal from it, that unfortunately is part of the
artwork's meaning and identity, even if the reader didn't
know about it. So I think there's this interesting
case of when artworks are these. Incredibly rich objects
that we can continue to discover their properties, their
meanings, their aesthetic properties. Perhaps those works are now
ugly, as a result. Perhaps, you know, they, their
artistic value has gone down. If you think the
artistic and the moral realms interact in that way,
if an artwork is immoral, it might make it
worse as an artwork if you're a particular moralist
in the debate, um. But it's almost as if
I'd say those properties were always there, even if
we couldn't detect them. But I do think as
well with the moral artist problem. There are different
ways that that moral character can come out, but
it seems like in Neil Gaiman's case, I mean,
I've only read one of his books, and I
can't recall that it, you know, that it had
anything egregiously, you know, relevant to his own crimes
and his misdeeds. But your example is fantastic, er,
is a great example of how an artist's immorality
is kind of evidenced by the, Uh, artwork, and
in that case it is obviously a problematic connection
that would indeed affect how you interpret the, the
story, whatever it is.
Uh, uh, WHAT do you think, I, I mean,
and, and also, uh, along the same line of
thought of us over time uncovering depraved acts by
artists. I mean, sometimes I, I find myself thinking
about this. Do you think that we as consumers
of art should be held responsible for, I don't
know, of course, some of these. Acts we can't
just find them out for ourselves. I mean, it
has to be the proper authorities doing that and
then it coming out to the public. But do
you think that we should perhaps be a little
bit more responsible with searching as best we can,
the life of the particular artists, the particular creators?
Yeah, that's a really good question. I think we
need to be careful about being placing sort of
those level of demands on consumers of our, especially
in our society at the moment where we're all
sleep deprived in in different ways depending on gender
and race, things like that. There's like a sleep
gap, there's a gender pay gap, there's like. And
I feel like to to consume art in this
day and age is already quite a privileged thing
to do. And we all have so little time.
So I'd be wary of kind of saying, yeah,
that it was the responsibility would fall on on
the viewer to like really detect the true or
the kind of core properties that are in that
work that they might not know if they just
consumed it. And that's why I think. I wouldn't
necessarily blame someone for just escaping in Neil's, for
instance, Neil Gaiman's um stories. I wouldn't blame someone
necessarily for doing that, but I do think what
we do have a responsibility to to do is
when we are told, or when we do others,
as you say, of some other way find out,
we do have a responsibility to. Think critically about
our relationship. With that artwork, like for instance. When
I was growing up, I didn't like go again,
but that's just because he upset Van Gogh, who's
like my all time favorite artist, um. That's like,
OK, like that, you know, that's, whatever reason I,
and I actually never really liked his paintings anyway,
and it might be because I as a young
girl, I was looking at them, I was like
well, I'm looking at a young girl sort of
naked on the bed and as a kid I
didn't have the vocabulary to really articulate why that
was a bit gross. Um, BUT maybe there was
something in me that was a reason I didn't
like them. And I think I have a responsibility
as a blossom of art. To honor things about
Gauguin's life and to work out philosophically how that
determines the properties of his artwork, um. I wouldn't
blame someone else like I, one of my friends
actually, she didn't know, even up until recently, she
didn't know of the about Gauguin's paintings of his
that they were of his child brides, and that
this knowledge massively affected her. Experience, and appreciation, perception
even of those paintings, but I wouldn't, I was,
I didn't blame her for not knowing that before,
um, but she has a responsibility now to look
at them differently.
Yeah, in the case of Goge, I mean, I
guess it was not just the sexism and the
racism, but also the colonial mentality that is promoted
through his paintings, correct?
Yeah, and Gin is a tricky case because there
are some uh scholars who have argued that he
actually, his relationship with um, The locals in French
Polynesia, in particular Tahiti and er Hivaa, er, a
few of the places he lived, um, he had
apparently a kind of knowledge about the local customs
and particularly local names for people and deities, more
he knew more about those groups than anthropologists did.
So whilst we need to acknowledge that, that like
his, his gaze wasn't entirely like. Um, DISMISSIVE of
this group. I think he genuinely had a fascination,
and, er, with, with these, um, with, with French
Polynesian people. However, Despite that, we also need to,
um, acknowledge the fact that when he went over
there in his 40s, when he abandoned his wife
and children, he was escaping France and what he
saw is actually relevant to what you're saying before
about depraved. He saw European culture is degenerate, and
he saw French Polynesia as Eden, untouched by kind
of toxic, uh, European civilization. But he also saw
the people there as so-called savages. In his own
diaries, he wrote of, um, Polynesian girls in particular
as animal-like. Um, HE described them as snake-like and
er deep down desiring rape as well. So, absolutely,
he went over there, he took advantage of local,
um, Customs to do with child marriage, which is
peculiar because yes, it was kind of normal in
the 19th century in French French Polynesia to sell
girls into into marriage. And people like, well, it
was OK. It's like, well, no, just because that
particular civilization or or society thinks that that's OK,
doesn't mean it is. The fact that he took
advantage of that. And yet, the fact that that
was still permitted, but other parts of their culture
had been banned because French colonial rule by this
point had overtaken Polynesia, uh, their customs and own
kind of, uh, culture had been suppressed by that
point. So when he actually got there, he was
just Gauguin was disappointed because he wasn't that far
away from, you know, Christian France at this point.
So, he definitely took advantage of his, you know,
colonial power as he had there. Yeah.
So let's talk a little bit about depictions of
sex and nudity, because I mean again for conservative
people it's very common that they would label any
depictions or almost any depictions of sex and. That
has obscene. They use this word very often. So
is it, do you think that it is right
to judge artworks for the simple fact that they
depict such scenes as obscene?
No, absolutely not. And I think when we judge
an artwork to be obscene, in part because of
its sexual content, what we're at what's actually happening
is that judgment derives normally from deep set prejudices
or indeed, um, uh, an unfamiliarity with the artwork
because it's showing sex in an unacceptable way. So
if you compare, for instance, um. A lot of
the sex or, um, erotic paintings of the Italian
Renaissance, these paintings are glamorizing and eroticizing and in
some cases sanitizing sexual violence. But because they were
seen as like as part of the aristocratic or
royal, um, they were often commissioned by royals. Um,
FOR instance, you know, in Spain by King Philip
the 2nd, um, They were treated as what the
philosopher Anne Eaton notes in her paper on kind
of the porn art divide as, um, honesto, like
virtuous. So their sex is OK because it was
for the upper classes, and that's OK. But if
you, you know, once the invention of the printing
press, particularly the German, not just the Chinese one,
but the German one in particular, meant that a
lot of kind of, um, saucy. Literature and prints
as well, engravings started to reach the kind of
lower rungs of society. That was seen as dishones
though. So like, full of vice and problematic. So
I think it's not, it's not just sex being
depicted, it's who has ownership over it and who
is being permitted to enjoy that. And this is
also the case, um. When we have a clash
of, uh, visions, in particular religious visions saturated with
colonial mentality. So there's some amazing testimonies from medieval
and early modern, uh, merchants who would, um, from
Europe who would go to India and see some
of the, um, Hindu and Jain, uh, temples that
would, you know, show medieval, uh, Indian life, um,
dancing, farming, um, food, things like that. But they're
like few kind of sexually explicit carvings, for instance,
the so-called Kama Sutra temples, which are actually called
the Um, Kajuraho monuments, um, which are about 1000
years old. Only about 10% of those carvings show
erotic sculpture. But because they were like very um
explicit, but but really it wasn't the explicitness. I
think that was the problem. It was the fact
that it was this, um, non-Christian religion who saw
sex differently to the kind of Christian mindset, um,
of some of these travelers because sex, uh, and,
you know, for instance, Hindu and Buddhist religion is
not seen as a kind of um sinful thing
to do. And it's not just it's to do
with love and spirituality, it's not just to do
with, um, procreation. So, And again it's about who
has ownership over that sex as well, and this
this this sort of um. Prejudice and double standards
reaches all the way to like the 2020, um.
Controversy around Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion's rap
song, um, which I'll let your viewers look at
what, what that stands for, but, um, you know,
it's a bombastic ode to female pleasure, um, but
there was huge outcry against it because it, uh,
it was women of color, expressing their sexual agency.
And the fact that it's women of color in
particular doing this, who have for centuries been hypersexualized,
um, and dehumanized via a sexual lens, um, to
see women of color taking back their sexual agency,
that's what's problematic. Um. And a lot of the
right wing commentators that denounced it, um, as pure
depravity. One person said a woman, a woman, I
think said that as well. Um, OTHER commentators said
it was just extremely vulgar step back in feminist
progress. But at the time, the, uh, President Donald
Trump was normalizing sexual assault. So sex is OK.
And if it's in the locker room, discussed in
the men's locker room, but it's not OK if
a woman of color celebrates sex. So it's not
about sex per se, it's about who has power
over it.
Yeah, there, there's definitely lots of hypocrisy going around,
and I mean, since we're talking about sex and
nudity, I guess that, that makes a great segue
into the, the topic of pornography because I've been
having these conversations on the show about that in
the sense that, OK, so sometimes people Uh, condemn,
there are even feminists who condemn pornography, but something
that they might not even realize, or, I mean,
some of them perhaps don't even care about it,
but they might not even realize the fact that
by condemning just Pornography in general, I mean, at
the same time they might be condemning queer art,
LGBTQ plus art, and artistic expressions, and even when
it comes to the, for example, the sex workers
themselves, if we're talking about porn actresses because they
at least, I mean we could argue they also
produce. Artworks, I mean, they might be condemning them
to poorer working conditions and also for women more
generally, women in general, they might be even, even
if unintentionally aligning themselves with a patriarchal stance in
the sense that they are more broadly condemning female
sexuality and female. Sexual pleasure. I mean, there there
are, there are several layers to this. I mean,
I would like to hear your thoughts about that.
Yeah, absolutely, you capture the kind of complexities really
well and I think I, I'm definitely sympathetic to,
uh, the concern around some genres of pornography, which
we've got to think about a lot of the
time when the so-called porn wars erupted in the.
70s and 80s. This sort of came out of,
um, particularly in the West, a general concern about
what Mary Whitehouse, the campaigner called the overly like
permissive society. And Mary Whitehouse in the 60s was
concerned that obscene, what she would call kind of
obscene videos, but she was mainly railing against pornography,
was corrupting minds and in particular young minds. Now
she, Herself was homophobic, and she should be denounced
for that, but some of her lobbying did result
in something good like she criminalized, um, she, her
lobbying resulted in legislation that criminalized child pornography. And
that's a good thing, and I think what she
was correct about, and this is sort of the
side of the porn wars that I am on,
people like Andrea Da Walkin, Catherine McKinnon writing that
pornography causes, or as my, um, mentor Ray Langton
has sort of popularized the view that it constitutes
as well as causes harm towards women. And I
think when said about particular genres of pornography, um,
those that eroticize, so in in egalitarian pornography, so
those those pornographic works that eroticize, um, patriarchal kind
of conditioning of what sex should look like. That
eroticizes non-consent, that expresses and peddles rape myths, that
um sort of creates certain scripts of what particularly
girls and women should look like. So the kind
of body types and the norms and what good
sex looks like. This is all bad. Um, AND
this is mainly because these were the dominant genres
of porn at the time in the 70s and
80s. A lot of porn that was kind of
mainstream was doing this, and I think that's, we
got to be conscious that that's I think what
the porn wars were. And Railing against and loads
of studies show that, That that type of pornography
and the extreme types of it as well, including
snuff films, um, do unfortunately, er distort and perhaps
deform boys and girls' expectations of what good sex
is, what the, you know, dismissing consent, um, what
what a sexually attractive body should look like. And
the studies are there and the and the philosophers
you write about this, like for instance again Anne
Eaton, when someone says this porn causes harm towards
women, it's not like a simple sort of billiard
ball, like one, like simple picture of causation, like
one ball hits the other. It's not that a
boy or a man watching porn is just gonna
go out and do something terrible to a woman.
Anne Eaton compares it to smoking, which I think
is a really powerful model, so smoking just one
cigarette is not going to give you cancer, but
smoking cigarettes habitually over a long period of time
will at least increase your risk of cancer. And
so a similar kind of disease based. Uh, MODEL
can be used for consuming this particular genre of
pornography, and that is what the studies are showing,
sadly. Um, BUT we also need to bear in
mind, There's a lot of transgressive and progressive, er,
genres of pornography. Pornography today is so wide and
varied, and there's a whole genre that you could
call, I guess, like feminist pornography. Um, IT doesn't
include like queer pornography, which will also have its
own problems, but I think with the proliferation of,
Pornographic material on the internet, especially now, we're we're
we're we're beyond the magazines hiding under people's beds,
right? Like it's got to such a point where
there's conceivably any genre of porn you can think
of, you can conceive it probably exists. So I
do think we need to be worried about a
lot of the mainstream porn that is still being
consumed today.
Mhm. Yeah, uh, I mean, there are, I guess,
uh, several layers to this question because, uh, I
think, and I, and I think that you agree
with me on that point that just condemning all
pornography as those sorts of problems that I mentioned
before and it condemns also queer artworks, LGBTQ artworks.
It condemns sex, sex workers in different ways and
Uh, female sexuality more broadly, but, uh, I mean,
at the same time, uh, it seems to me
that, that, uh many of the things that you
said there, I mean, I agree with them, and
also, for example, I've read on the show. Nina
Hartley twice. She's basically a feminist sex icon, and
she told me that for example, another issue that
she's, she's found within the porn industry is that
Uh, there are certain, uh, characteristics that people might
have, like, for example, uh, race or ethnicity that
might also work as a sort of, or, or
might be fetishized in pornography, and that's also, that
can also. Be problematic, but I mean, on the
other hand, there's also the aspect, like for example,
people like Meredith Ralston who talks about in her
book slut shaming, war phobia and unfinished sexual revolution
where basically she argues that by condemning just Pornography
in general and sex work in general that uh
as I said before, we are in a sense
holding a patriarchal stance because we think that uh
women, because I mean sex workers, the vast majority
of them are women, shouldn't be allowed to express
themselves sexually freely, you know.
Yeah, and I think this idea about sexual agency,
it's a tricky one because it's difficult to know
and think about what sexual agency would look like,
that is untouched or pure and not embedded in
existing patriarchal culture. Um, AND indeed, you know, A
lot of for some people sex isn't part of
their identity, it's not important to their lives and
we need to kind of bear in mind, those
kinds of experiences as well, um I think the
problem again as you say is, About the conditioning,
the conditions under which people's sexual agency is expressed,
and what we mustn't do is like, And I
do, I do think that's what some of the
dissenters to, um, I think I get the name
of the show in there, the dissenters, um, of
the sort of anti, uh, porn feminists saying like,
oh, you know, you're anti-sex and things like that,
and I, I sometimes they might have been, but
I think that we have to be careful about.
Um, PRESENTING that debate in a very kind of
black and white way, um, it's about sexual violence,
it's not about sexual pleasure that that is the
problem, but I think you're right that we also
need to leave room for, Talking about pornography in
a way that doesn't, um, further marginalize and and
problems and, you know, damage the people that are
involved in making it and indeed the people who
wish to consume it. Um, BUT we also need
to do that whilst acknowledging the very real harms
that do derive from some porn.
Mhm. Uh, DO you think that art can cause
a crime, or is that for the most part
a scapegoat or an excuse?
Yeah, and this, this is, it's a nice sort
of link to the porn debate as well, because
the question of whether art can cause people to
do bad things, um, I kind of run that
in parallel with pornography insofar as, um. Again, we
can rely on philosophical and psychological evidence and concepts
to make sense of that causation claim, because on
the one hand, we have, um, kind of ancient
views, particularly from. Ancient Greece, like Plato's worry that
particularly music could induce a kind of, it could
disrupt the various parts of our soul, reason, er,
spirit and desire, and most music really for Plato
would stir up our emotions, our desires, um, and
it kind of impacts and impede our rational faculties.
So he was really worried about music in particular.
And indeed poetry and theater that would present because
of their realism, they would present kind of characters
indulging in their emotions, which Plato thought was a
bad thing. But Aristotle on the other hand, thought,
no, like this is a good use for viewers
to kind of. Experience their emotions via this character
and as a healthy way to channel, what he
called a kind of catharsis, a kind of release,
so that they could then behave well, er, away
from the art sphere. Um, AND we also have,
this is part of the reason some of these
thinkers were worried about art, causing us to do
bad things is because particular view in antiquity was
that art had kind of magical qualities that it
could, um, It was called a, some classicists call
it a mimetic contagion. So because of the kind
of increasing realism of sculpture, theater, um. That people
would, upon seeing these works frequently. That would actually
cause them or induce them. It's almost like the
artwork was sort of, uh, moving out of its
frame and kind of like causing the person to
imitate it or or do something really bad. And
there are some amazing myths about, for instance, the
ancient Greek sculpture of Aphrodite, the Aphrodite of Nidos
from the 4th century BC, um, There was a
Roman myth, uh, in this from the 2nd century
BC that a man saw this sculpture and thought
it was so lifelike and beautiful that he had
sex with it, um, left a stain on it,
let's just say. And when he was discovered over
what he'd done, he was so full of shame
that he threw himself off a cliff. And whether
or not that story's true, it shows that these
sculptures. With their lifelikeness and indeed their um they
were often shown in public. Um, SENSE what the
art historian Kenneth Clarke called a sensuous tremor across
the Mediterranean. And now what we're seeing, this isn't
just sort of left to the distance distant lands
of antiquity. Now we have this problem, but particularly
with video games, and similar kinds of studies are
showing similar results to the pornography studies that playing
video games habitually. And in particular violent video games,
studies are showing that that actually. Even if not
leads to criminal behavior, it, er changes people, it
molds people's minds in a bad way. So some
one study showed that playing violent video games on
a regular basis actually, er meant that players had
more ready access to aggressive thoughts than those that
didn't, um. And again, I think philosophically what's happening
here is the fiction reality boundary. Is particularly in
video games is becoming increasingly porous because of their
heightened realism. The graphics now, I've just seen some
of like the Grand Theft Auto video game that's
coming out I think in September, has been like
highly anticipated for ages. It's the graphics just get
more and more and more insanely real. You've got
haptic feedback where you can feel the wet like
the impact of weaponry or even rain, um in
the tools you used to play with it. And
this is only gonna get more and more. Extreme,
um, and these, these, the, there is proof, seemingly
proof that this is at least molding our minds
in a bad way.
Yeah, but there are specific cases where the accusations
lever that artists are ridiculous, right, because, for example,
and of course I'm not defending the man completely
because he also has some bad traits, but back
in when the Columbine massacre. Occurred in the US
there were people who were accusing Marilyn Manson because
of his music of inciting or riling up young
people to commit those kinds of acts of violence,
but I mean in that particular case, I don't
think that there's any link at all. I mean,
not that Marilyn. Not that Marilyn Manson himself has
not done any bad things. I mean, he has
for sure, but I don't think that he ever
incited people to do school shootings.
Yeah, exactly, and I think in the book I'm
careful to draw that distinction between there's lots of
different models of causation that will be relevant to
this question. But at least two I look at
are the differences between arousal and incitement. So, in
the case of the Columbine shooting massacre. The two
shooters reportedly actually, not only were they not inspired
by Marilyn Manson, apparently they also hated his music.
So they were like, particularly away from, you know,
Marilyn Manson, but Marilyn Manson by this point was
already such a controversial figure, this kind of shock,
horror rock, um, and particularly transgressive imagery that he
would use in his videos. Um, WAS already of
a huge concern, particularly amongst, um, some parents, and
people would often picket outside of his concerts saying
that his music was inciting, um, rape and violence
and things like that. But Marilyn Manson, whilst acknowledging
that he himself is no moral saint, he said
that, This tragedy was a result of access to
guns and kind of more general societal problems, probably
with things like an early form of maybe the
manosphere or something like that. It had nothing to
do with his music, which he said simply encouraged,
um, like teenagers basically to embrace difference. And, um,
as a kind of healthy channel for their emotions.
And he didn't think Goth subculture could should be
to be, er, blamed for that tragedy. Um, BUT
there are whilst there are cases when we have
artworks like that, and in particular certain genres of
music, so drill music, for instance, has been swept
up in a recent moral panic, um, where drill
artists are now being accused of inciting, um, Violence,
particularly among black youths. And this has gone to
like another extreme now because some of the lyrics
in this music are being used as evidence. Um,
DRILLERS are being kind of, um, censored and and
treated almost similar to, um, uh, how terrorists should
be, uh, investigated. Um, AND that people who have
done committed a crime. The fact that they listen
to drill is being taken as evidence of their
kind of wayward character. The problem though is that
the evidence just isn't there for this particular music
for it's it's especially not inciting in this like
straightforward way. So incitement is where a person explicitly
urges another person to do something bad, and that
intention has to be proven. And yes, in the
past, artworks certainly can be forms of incitement. Nazi
propaganda was very clearly incitement to genocide. No doubt.
That's why Julius Stryker of the Sturmer Publishing House,
who published all the anti-Semitic children's books, was hanged
at the Nuremberg trials. So yes, art can incite
violence. But we have to be careful which artworks
we um sort of tar with that incitement brush,
because in the case of drill, philosophers like Terry
Jallow have argued that there's a kind of epistemic
injustice happening here, where the drillers say. This is
like a sort of complex, um, hybrid of fiction
and bravado. ER, it's we're not confessing to having
done these violent things, um, and yet people don't
believe them, and that's in part because of their
anti-black prejudices, particularly against black men for just being
criminals. Um, AND that's distorting their, um. Judgment about
that particular genre of music, so I think art
can be connected to criminality in a direct way
through incitement, but we have to be careful which
artists we target with that and why.
Yeah, I mean, it's interesting. I, I'm just going
to add, and you can also comment on it,
that when it comes to the arousal bit specifically,
of course, I'm not trying to establish a direct
link here between, for example, metal music and violence,
but there's also been research done on the fact
that uh metal music also makes people angrier. So
I mean, by listening to metal music, people. TEND
to become angrier and of course I'm not sure
if it depends on the particular style of metal
because there are many different kinds of metal out
there. There's industrial metal, black metal, death metal, power
metal. So I mean it could depend a little
bit on the particular style, but there's definitely been
research done where people have established a link between
listening to metal music and feeling angry.
Yeah, and I, and I think as well there
might be some similarity there with the video games.
So consuming a certain type of music, um, that
is, for instance, particularly violent, um, depicts or glamorizes
violence, and some metal genres do do this, um.
I wouldn't be surprised that there's a similar kind
of result there, that it can mold people's emotions,
it can kind of make them feel more negative
emotions. But I am aware of another study, um,
that I briefly mentioned in the book that shows
the opposite. Well, not quite the opposite, but actually
the idea that people listen to metal music because
they're already angry. And I think this is why
we need to be careful with, um, I don't,
from what I might be wrong about this, I
think a lot more research has been done on
video games, as opposed to metal music. So it
might be that the the data just isn't there
yet. But the data at the moment seems uh
A bit tricky because there's other studies showed that
people approach metal music because they're already feeling angry
and actually the music can be a safe and
useful channel for that negative emotion. And often people
from various different subcultures, alternative subcultures say, The particular
kinds of music, for instance, metal, um, goth and
rock and things like that. It actually makes them
happier because there's the community aspect. There's the music,
allowing them to find who they are, learn more
about themselves. Uh, IN my case, at least, like
embrace different beauty standards. Um, IT was a goth
subculture that was the first to tell me that
having red hair was a pretty thing. At that
point, I've been bullied for it for years. So,
yeah, I think, I think at the moment, the
data's not quite there to show. Um, BUT then
we do have famous cases of like Woodstock '99,
where bands like Limp Biscuit, you could say bordering
on incitement, basically, at the middle of their break
stuff song told a very already off crowd that,
um, Take all that negative energy and let it
out, and they did. And it was, you know,
infamously chaotic and people got hurt as a result.
Um, SO it's not always a healthy channel for
that emotion.
Yeah, it's definitely a complicated picture because I guess
that in the case of certain people it might
even Act as a form of catharsis and so
they have the catharsis and then they don't feel
the need to go out and I mean as
Limpis Limpiski say break stuff or hurt people or
something like that, but I mean it's just might
act as a form of catharsis and also I
mean the other thing you're pointing to, I guess
is the fact that some of these links established
between violent video games or violent music and violent
acts, it can be, I mean, the causality might
be reversed in the sense that it's violent people
playing, playing violent video games and listening to violent
music, and so they are. Already violent and the
music and the video games are not causing the
violence itself and so it might be a personal
uh psychological traits.
So. Absolutely, and I and I think we have
to be aware, you know, I'm no uh scientist
or anything, but obviously, you know, the researchers are
gonna have to bear that in mind. And I
think as well, another case of this would be,
uh, for a novel, so there are also cases
of novels. Causing perhaps not necessarily incitement. Um, THERE
are some that explicitly incite violence like to genocide
and things, but there are others that are kind
of more vaguely, uh, connected to the criminality that
ensues, the Marquis Dessard's erotic literature, which glamorizes, um.
And eroticizes sexual violence. Here, uh, the Marquis Dessard's
120 Days of Sodom, for instance, and his other
works from the 18th century, once they were made
more available, uh, in the 1950s and 19960s, who
got their hands on them? The Moor's murderers. So
like Ian Brady, Myra Hindley, they, when police inspected
their personal libraries, they found some of the works
of the Marquis Assad. And Ian Brady himself said
that he identified as one of a Sardian hero.
And that they were very much inspired by the
Sardian kind of nihilistic philosophy or a kind of
at the same time, a libertine philosophy. So there's
no right or wrong at all. The only real
values in life are pleasure and pain, and that
humans should, what it is to live a good
life is simply to, uh, find the most extreme
pleasure possible and at the expense of harming others.
Um, AND so. They then at a later point,
uh, murdered 5, sexually assaulted and murdered 5 children
and buried them on the moors near Manchester and.
It is tempting to say like, you know, did
the Marquis Dessard's work cause the Moores murderers? Not
really, insofar as it's, it's quite plausible that they
would have done those terrible things without having read
Sard. But I do think there's something there, the
fact that Ian Brady entered that Sardian world with
a mind already as it was. I do think
entering a world that so, I mean, SAR's writings
are very detailed and kind of realistic, um. I
think Ian Brady in particular, cos I think he
indoctrinated Maira Hindley with Sardjian literature, um, he probably
found in that kind of transgressive extreme world, that
world of extreme sexual domination. I, I, I wouldn't
be surprised if that inspired him or enabled him
to. Imagine it more in his mind, so. The
causal relation I think is still potentially there. Um,
Even if it's going to be more complicated, but
I think it's certainly affected his mind in that
way.
Yeah, yeah, I, I mean, Mar is the Sa's
work also influenced Pier Paolo Pazzolini's film Salo, and
I mean it's, it's an extremely hard watch, but
it's a sort of socialist movie in a sense
because I, I mean, at least the underlying message
there was to denounce the capitalist elites, but I,
I, I, I mean, but again, Pazzolini was also
a problematic figure in the sense that he seemed
to also have some pedophilic tendencies. So I I
I mean there are many
problematic figures. There are, and I think this is
the issue of like, yes, the Marquis Lassard absolutely
inspired avant-garde art, and he inspired this idea of
using the sexual body and extreme pornographic scenarios. Uh,
TO critique, and this is what 120 Days of
Sodom in some interpretations was doing. It was like
written in the early rumblings of the French Revolution.
It's kind of critiquing the um, More, you know,
the uh. Ruling estates, the ruling kind of classes,
um, the aristocracy, the, uh, the rules, the clergy,
um, and in a way it kind of some
people interpret it as a biting satire, um, of
these people, these ruling elites who have this kind
of unchecked power and corruption. And that's what Salo
was doing as well, as you say, it was
critiquing capitalist structures that that removes the autonomy of
the human being and leaves them as a pure
body. And you can use the kind of Sardian
aesthetic, that Sardian universe, to make sense of real
horrors that have happened since he penned that diabolical
tale. So, if you think these artworks are good,
as in like they're important, and I think they
are in a way. Yes, the Marquis Dessard inspired
serial killers, but he also inspired a whole new
way of art making, which is probably a good
thing. So yeah, it's a tricky one.
Yeah, so let me ask you another question now,
because this is actually a discussion that I've had
with friends actually. So can art contribute to oppressive
regimes? I mean, because we have this as progressives,
we have this sort of idea or we tend
to associate art. With progressivism, I mean in the
sense that for example, because art in principle is
limitless in terms of the different things that it
can express and The different art forms out there,
there's this idea that, uh, I mean, art is
always transgressive. I mean that it, it doesn't align
itself with the status quo, but actually that, that's
not always the case, right? I mean, particularly, for
example, if you look across Europe, there's lots of
um architecture out there that was created by Or
paid by and for oppressive regimes, right?
Yeah, so I think you're quite right. Like there's
this idea that, um, art, its relation to morality
should be always to transgress it, and I think
there is, um, there is something absolutely to that.
But yeah, so the idea that art can oppress,
I understand that through the lens of hate speech.
So kind of connected to what we were talking
about before about causation. And incitement Often when we
think of hate speech. It's considered, um, speech that
is like contempt of speech er in that targets
someone because of their social identity, like their gender
or race or um class and so on and
religion. Um, AND whilst hate speech traditionally was seen
as, um, speech that can incite violence, like incite
a riot, for instance, or incite but also cause
psychological damage to those targeted by it, and indeed
the perpetrators of it as well. Um, PHILOSOPHERS of
language in the last sort of 50 or so
years have really started looking at, um, inspired by
JL Austen in the 1950s, the Oxford philosopher, writing
about how speech actually constitutes harm. Um, SO this
idea that speech doesn't just represent reality, um, we
can actually do actions with our words, and that
can range from anything from like everyday things like
assertion, questioning, ordering, requesting, all the way through to,
um, finding, you know, A jury, um, having a
verdict of over someone transforms their social status. We've
got state sanctioned speech, um, for instance, like signage
in the, uh, in apartheid era saying like whites
only signs. This is speech that, um, Oppresses a
whole social group because it ranks them as inferior
and in legal contexts and indeed non-legal everyday contexts
can deprive that group of rights simply in if
the speaker has enough authority in various ways, they
can actually mold social reality through what it does.
And I think a lot of artworks are doing
the same thing, they're performing. What these philosophers have
called elocutionary acts. So these are the actions that
are done in saying something. So it's not really
about, I'm saying something and then something happens later
later on in the world at a later time,
that's of interest here. What's of concern here is
what the artwork or the speech is, how it's
molding social reality, it's essentially saying, you are, it
could be like an order, for instance, or an
assertion, like you should. See this person in this
negative way, and it gives permission, it's a kind
of, it enacts what Mary Kate McGowan calls permissibility
facts. With the correct authority, this kind of speech
can legitimize poor treatment of that particular social group
and, Whilst kind of more straightforward racist, sexist speech,
if that's slurs, jokes, or just explicit, um, you
know, get out, you're not welcome here or go
back to your country, these horrible things. Um, WHILST
that can happen in more straightforward speech like that,
I think it can also happen, um, through art.
And I think that's because, particularly visual art, um,
whilst it doesn't employ a conventional language in the
same way, it doesn't have a grammar, it doesn't
have a vocabulary, but I still think it can
act, it can perform these elocutionary acts. Um, AND
classic cases of art being oppressive in this way
could be anything from. Uh, PARTICULAR traditions in the
Italian Renaissance like heroic rape imagery, um, through its
romanticization and eroticization of sexual violence. In the book,
I argue how that functions as a kind of
hate speech against women, um, ranks us as inferior,
legitimizes, um. Rape myths and things like that. But
then we also have, um, anti-Semitic propaganda, which, as
far as I know, goes back to at least
the 13th century, all the way through to, uh,
Nazi propaganda and of course the kind of, um,
awful kind of memes and things that we now
see online. Um, BUT also anti-black imagery. And so
this is really moving from high so-called high art
down to everyday artifacts. So artifacts of the Jim
Crow era, for instance, in America, that could range
from anything from like cartoons, postcards. Jewelry, trinkets, kind
of bric a brac in your like little figurines
and things in in people's houses, dolls, toys. These
would again act as a kind of dehumanizing speech
and in doing that legitimize poor treatment and entrench
existing social injustice in that way.
Right, so, uh, when it comes to separating or
the debate around separating the art from the artist
and if and when we should do it, I
mean, actually in our first conversation we talked a
lot about that, so I will also be linking
to it in the description below. So, but I
would like to ask you a specific question. What
if um the kind of immorality that is associated
with a particular artist is not expressed in their
work. So for example, uh JK Rowling, I mean,
she's pretty much a transphobe. I mean, I, I
guess that's not debatable at all, but Uh, in
Harry Potter, for example, I mean, it's not that
it's, it doesn't have any problematic aspects because it
certainly does. I mean, uh, for example, when it
comes to the treatment of the elves, it, uh,
endorses slavery, it endorses fat phobia, it endorses Lukeism
because I mean, it's apparent. OK for for JK
Rowling to bully people on the basis of them
being fat or ugly or something like that, but,
but I mean, but that has not at least
directly to do with transphobia. I mean, but if
we can't find transphobia in the Harry Potter books.
I mean, should we, at least in that particular
case, try to separate JK Rowling from Harry Potter
or not?
Yeah, that's a great question. I think this is
what I call a hard case, where you have
lots of cases where an artist. This moral character
is evident in their art, either explicitly. I'm also
interested in how moral character can be expressed in
style. So that's when I look at Hitler's paintings,
for instance, they don't explicitly depict something anti-Semitic or
violent, or incite genocide in that way, but they
implicitly have a style that is what I call
a kind of proto-Nazi style. I won't get into
that now, but like, yeah, this, this kind of
JK Rowling case is kind of the other end
of the spectrum where for the sake of argument,
cos I think some people have perhaps found some
transphobia in the Harry Potter novels and films. I
do like Harry Potter, but I don't know it
that like well enough to know if there's, so
let's just assume for the sake of argument there's
no evidence of like transphobia in, in the artworks
themselves. I think in that case we have a
few. Dimensions where I still don't think we can
separate the art from the artist insofar as this
is still the production, the creation of JK Rowling,
and I think in that way, I think it's
sort of, some people might think it irrational, but
I think, Sometimes people just don't want to be
near or engage with an artifact that was created
by someone who, uh, whose views you vehemently disagree
with and indeed whose views might be considered, um,
to be extremely detrimental and harmful, um, to not
just trans people, but, you know, anyone like queer
community, um. So in that case, I think the
disgust or the kind of um resistance we might
feel to enjoying it, it can just affect and
get in the way of our aesthetic experience. And
I think that's fair enough because I do think
artworks are fundamentally human creations. And I don't think,
you know, Harry Potter didn't drop out of the
sky. You know, it wasn't made by some other
non-human life form. Like it was made by a
person at a particular point in time. Um, SO
I think that affecting how you engage with it
there is, is reasonable. Um, THERE'S also practical reasons
here. So I know that some people don't, will,
will be avoiding the new HBO, I think it's
HBO series of the new Harry Potter, um. And
that's mainly in part the impression I've got, um,
isn't because they think, oh, how, you know, JK
Rowling being who she is, that's gonna ruin my
experience of it. They're doing it out of practical
concern that the the money that she's gonna be
getting from this will be directly fed into transphobic,
um. Uh, GROUPS, and there we have quite an
easy decision to make of like a kind of
boycott. I don't want my money going towards that
cause, so I'm not gonna watch it for that
reason. Um,
YEAH, I think, by the way, do you think
that that's a legitimate approach for people to have
to decide to boycott particular artists or works of
art?
I think when it comes to funding, not choosing
where your hard, hard earned money, where which estates
it's funding and which causes its funding, I think
that is perfectly reasonable. I also think though that
people are fundamentally, Like inconsistent, or maybe it's just
me, but like I, I went to watch the
new Michael Jackson film, and I thought it was,
I thought it was incredible. I was like, oh
my God, this is amazing, and for a lot
of people I think sometimes the love we might
have for, not necessarily the artists but like the
the, their art that they've given us, a lot
of people and I've sort of stumbled into this
bizarre world on Instagram at the moment, the algorithm
has taken me to, There's, there's enormous amounts of
people who are convinced Michael Jackson is innocent, and
they are so defensive of him, and I think
that's because people loved him so much
and I, I, I mean when it comes to
that, of course I'm not defending Michael Jackson at
all, but uh I I'm I just want to
say that, I, I mean he was, um, He
was acquitted I mean he was acquitted by a
jury, so I mean that that's all I have
to say about it. I, I'm not saying that
I'm not saying that just because of that, nothing
happened. I'm just saying that at least in terms
of er legal procedures, I mean it was never
considered. Absolutely.
So he was never, I think, charged either. I
might have to double check that. But yeah, so
he, he was, he was never found guilty of
of these. The allegations still stand, um, that I
know of. And you know, they, when they became
particularly public in 2019, some radio stations stopped playing
Michael Jackson's songs. But what's curious is now is
that I think because What Michael Jackson's art has
given us, you know, it broke down racial barriers,
it transformed what pop music could be, it transformed
like the artistry of a music video, um, that
arguably people like Queen sort of started before, but
like, um, A lot of people also identify with
Michael Jackson's music from a social justice point of
view, so a lot of people would say a
lot of his songs, um, concern, uh, say like
Beat It for instance, about masculinity, about gang culture,
the fact that his music video brought together, uh,
warring kind of gang, uh, members. These are all
undeniably good things and I think because of that,
often people's decisions about whether they stop listening to
Michael Jackson or not, are gonna be even harder,
um, and I think this might be the same
with Harry Potter as well. I I've got friends
who are trans allies, but they adore Harry Potter,
they grew up with it, it's part of their
identity, um, so I think we need to be,
Um, like I, I was criticized heavily for going
to see the Michael Jackson film, um, by, by
some friends, um. And I think you know they're
they're entitled to that criticism, but I think we
need to bear in mind, people, a lot of
our people shapes people's sense of their own identity.
Um, PHILOSOPHERS talk about us having an aesthetic self,
a lot of music and literature can help us.
Find ourselves, it can be in a form of
escapism when we're kids, um. Yeah, and I don't
that doesn't go away automatically just because you feel
you ought to boycott a particular artist.
Well, you know, I guess that we all have
some contradictions, right, because I mean I, I'm very
much not a traditionalist or a religious person, but
I can't stop loving the Lord of the Rings,
so, you know.
Yeah, yeah, exactly, exactly, and I think this is
the the tricky thing about at the end of
the day. We take what we want from an
artwork, I do think we need to pay attention
to the very real meaning that is there. Like
for instance, if you really just really liked Hitler's
paintings, because they looked pretty, and a lot of
people do think they look pretty, right, they might
be a bit crap, but they, you know, they
look pretty and peaceful and pleasant to look at.
That I'd be like, yeah, OK, but you really
ought to know. That actually this is a this
is a depraved kind of immoral vision that he's
giving us. It's actually very insidious, um. So there,
you know, we might, I think we, we're gonna
be able to criticize other people for making their
artistic choices, what they choose to fill their lives
with, um. And it's whether or not they're engaging
with the artwork as a whole or if they're
just taking it surface level, like oh I just
I just really like the sound of Michael Jackson's
music, so I'm just gonna carry on listening, it
makes me wanna dance, so, but I think they're,
you know, Well that's a tricky case anyway, but
with say Hitler's paintings, you're not engaging with the
artwork fully, and as long as you know that,
then you know, I'm not going to stand behind
you and police saying you're doing it wrong, kind
of thing.
Yeah, yeah, I, I mean for me personally, another
example is Dentist Divine Comedy. I mean, it's just,
for example, there's um one of the. Circles, circles
of hell, there's arguably homosexuals there and there's also
the circle of people who committed suicide, and I
mean, of course I don't think that being homosexual
is immoral at all, and I also don't condemn
people who commit suicide, but I'm also like. But
damn,
the poem is so good. Yeah, yeah, and I
think this is, this is what philosophers about. I
think this is why it's been tricky to bring
this debate to the general public. People want very
kind of like black and white, sort of almost
sensationalist answers, like pro or anti. It's like actually
no, artworks, because they're by their nature incredibly rich
objects, they're gonna have multiple properties about them. You
know, your example there, it's gonna have value. Is
an artwork, undeniable value at the same time as
having immoral properties, and it's a case, sometimes it's
a case of weighing up those properties, like it's
immoral immorality is just too much, and it ought
not just that it does, but it ought to
make us, um, either move away from it or
not wish to consume it or indeed condemn it
and things like that. Um, BUT you can see
even the Marquis of Sars literature has value. But
that's not, that's not just to say that is
not to justify. Or sanitize the deep immorality within
his works.
So yeah, so when it comes to how we
should deal with immoral artists or works of art,
I have just two more questions I'd like to
ask you. So do you think that censorship can
be a solution?
Um, I think censorship, first of all, we need
to get clear on what we mean by censorship.
So it can mean anything from like suppression of
an artwork, like stopping it from being either performed
or shown an exhibition or indeed distributed, um. In
any kind of form, but it can also mean
outright destruction. So in that sense, if an artwork's
already been made, and it's incredibly immoral, say it's
oppressive or it incites violence or something. I don't
think we should censor it in terms of destroying
it. Um, AND in part that's because I think
even depraved heritage, if you want to call it
that, needs to be preserved for lots of reasons.
Like I don't think we should be, especially in
this day and age, we shouldn't be burning. Adolf
Hitler's paintings. And there was on a Jimmy Carr
show, a few years ago, an audience voted to
destroy various works of art made by moral artists.
They had an original watercolor by Adolf Hitler of
a church, um, and the audience voted to destroy
it, and he lowered it into like a row
of chainsaws. I mean, the show was kind of
problematic for lots of ways, kind of making a
spectacle out of like iconoclasm, which was interesting in
itself, but I don't think even Hitler's paintings should
be destroyed. I don't think Gauguin's paintings should be
destroyed or hidden in vaults, um. Because in part,
even artworks that have been incredibly harmful, we need
to preserve them, to learn from them, and they
can act as a warning for where we're going
again, especially with like the constant rise of the
far right. A lot of these artworks like anti-Semitic
propaganda, they need to be curated and handled sensitively.
But to completely destroy them, there's a risk there
of dismissing the role that art can play. In,
say, genocide and social progress and liberation, um, so
I think in that sense, just pure destruction, pure
iconoclasm is not the right answer. And we also
need to be even cautious about censorship in terms
of suppression. Because in the past, the art that's
often been censored, um, in that way is the
kind of art we were talking about before, art
that isn't actually immoral or a danger to society.
Um, IT simply violates our social mores, our conventional
norms. Um, A lot of queer art, for instance,
has been censored across the world, er. You know,
11 example would be, um, in 1928, Radcliffe Hall's
The Well of Loneliness novel was banned by UK
courts. It wasn't even sexually explicit, I don't think.
It's just because it was about a lesbian couple
during the First World War. Um, BUT we also
have cases like Megumi Gashi in Japan, um, who
in 2014 was thrown in jail because she made
an artwork in the shape of her own vulva.
Um. And, you know, the vulva in Japan is
still very, very taboo, whereas penises are perfectly acceptable,
um, in society. And so a lot of the
art that we wish to censor or suppress or
indeed, um, prosecute an artist for making it. It's
Just betraying deeper prejudices and biases against that person,
and then also we have to be very worried
about, Censoring art that's simply voicing, um, an opinion
or a view that goes against a particular authoritarian
regime, um. Uh, THE Nazi book burnings are a
case in point of sort of censorship in the
extreme form. They were just silencing dissent from anything
that anything was taken to be, um, against the
Nazi regime was destroyed. Um, AND this of course
can be incredibly dangerous to silencing those important voices.
So I think censorship in general we have to
be wary of, but I do think in terms
of incitement, We are right, it's, you know, if
there is clear incitement there, it's, it's correct, it's
correct to prosecute those artists. I think it's correct
that. Julius Stryker was um charged with incitement to
genocide in the Nuremberg trials through the art that
he was publishing. Um, SO in a legal way,
there's still things that can be done there that
might be deemed a kind of censorship, um, or
indeed prevention from making the art in the first
place. If it's harming animals or humans in the
process, then yes, we should stop that.
OK, so one final question. I mean, leaving just
aside for a second, the legality of it, I
mean, about whether legally we should prohibit certain kinds
of artistic expression or certain kinds of behaviors by
artists and all of that. I mean, just normatively,
I mean you. You're a philosopher of art. You're
an artist and a consumer of art as I
am. So do you think that in terms of
norms, in terms of how we should normatively approach
art and artists, do you think that we should
really approach art as if we think or if
we assume that should be absolute freedom of expression
in art. I mean, because personally I think that
sometimes there's a tendency, at least among certain art
appreciators, let's say, of putting artists on a pedestal
and wherever they explore in their artwork. OR sometimes
even whatever kind of behavior they have just because
they have a certain social status that you shouldn't
question it. Oh, it's he's an artist. I mean,
he's doing his thing. I mean, don't bother him.
And then we have, we have cases like Gauguin
and Picasso and We have, for example, what they
did to the actress in The Last Tango in
Paris and all of that. So, and, and sometimes
people just dismiss it as, 000 it's just art
and they're just artists. I mean, don't you think
that perhaps sometimes we should be a little bit
less permissive of certain kinds of artistic expression?
Yeah, definitely. So I, in in the book and
also just generally, I've always been very anti this
kind of the genius myth. Like, yes, these artists,
you know, are are particular canons, particularly the Western
canon, are dominated by, uh, they do have masterpieces.
Yes, these artists were incredibly talented. Um. But this
idea that they're somehow otherworldly, like they're particularly special
human beings that um, get a moral pass and
don't, I, I've always been really against that, and
I think it's it's it's tendency again to treat.
Artworks as somehow sacred. Uh, AND you know, in
many cultures, in many groups, artworks are sacred, and
I'm obviously completely understand that. But sacred in a
way that means they're not connected to the local,
the community that consumes it. That's what I don't
agree with. Um, THIS idea that art is somehow
separate from the world, and that it's this sort
of entirely insulated. Um, PRACTICE where anything, anything goes,
and I think in terms of, When an artist
has done wrong either in the view that they're
expressing in the artwork or indeed the very process
of creating it was unethical, I just think we
should treat them as we would, A human doing
just a normal non-artistic action, I think. This is
where I guess, you know, complicated art is special
in that. They're going back to the kind of
first question you asked me, like artworks are these
peculiar kind of objects that are rich in meaning.
And I think this is the this is the
problem going back to this question of censorship. A
lot of the time it's really hard, especially with
incitement, it's hard to find the artists can kind
of easily wiggle their way out of it because
it's not straightforward communication a lot of the time.
It is a kind of invitation to often a
fictional world that can have all sorts of meanings
and values that people can glean from it, um.
But I think there are still gonna be clear
cases where the way it's been made and the
and the view it expresses is harmful to society,
um, and absolutely we shouldn't be overly permissive just
because it's art. And indeed, you know, this is
sort of taking in a slightly outdated view about
so-called high art. These artworks are no longer locked
away in private collections in aristocratic homes. In the
dawn of the museum in the 19th century, these
artworks were made free in the West to many
parts of the general public. Um, THE printing press
meant that all sorts of novels and pictures were
making their way through across the world. And, Yeah,
because of that, it just seems like art is
an intimate part of our world. It affects how
we treat and see each other. Anything from beautiful
paintings to cartoons and um. You know, general artifacts
that are sort of on the brink, you know,
sort of artworks, but also sort of not, these
all these things really shape our moral compass in
a way that we have to take seriously what
they're doing. But I think the ethics of the
ethics of censorship depends on the ethics of the
artwork, um. Obviously, clear incitement to genocide shouldn't be
permitted, um. But in other cases, if an art
if an artwork is expressing a problematic perspective about
a person, that's why in the book I suggest
perhaps a better solution is a so-called counter speech,
um, to kind of disarm and destroy that work,
that artwork without physically destroying it. Um, AND that
that might be a way to get around this
problem of censorship, um. Which has its own problems.
Mhm. Right. OK, great. So the book is again
Depraved, The Story of Dangerous Art, and of course
I will be leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. And Dr. Dixon, apart
from the book, would you like to tell people
where they can find you and the rest of
your work on the internet?
Oh, do you mean like not, not me on
tour, but you mean my other work that's
Yeah, if you want to mention social media, your
yeah, yeah, OK, yeah, cool. So yeah, so I'm
on Instagram for my sins, um, you can find
me just Daisy Louise Dixon, I think, um, on
Instagram, and I'm trying to like do more philosophical
content on Instagram. Um, I'm also on X again
for my sins, um. And I also have some
of my articles are out in various academic journals.
You can find me on Google Scholar as well
for some of the more academic articles I've written.
And I'll also be giving talks, um, throughout the
country until at least October. Um, SO you'll find
that on my Instagram as well, um, where I'm
gonna be mostly talking about depraved art.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. I mean,
again, I absolutely love the book, so I recommend
it to my audience. I, I can't recommend it
enough and it's always great to talk with you.
That's great. Thanks so much for having me again,
Ricardo. It's always great to have such an in-depth
philosophical discussion as well, which is don't, you don't
always get uh in other sort of outlets, so
this has been great. Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herz Agnon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and
Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel,
Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego
Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro,
Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pan
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank,
Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.